
for some time, I find it weird that Quanyin [全 音] publication’s edition of classical piano scores do not have an ISBN number.
it is evident from some comparison that they simply copy Henle’s edition,
and it struck me once that they were simply evading copyright responsibilities.

I not only ordered many copied by People’s Republic of China with permission.
especially J S Bach, Beethoven, Chopin, and Debussy, for whom textual state is more problematic.
there can be helpful insights on the fingerings and ornaments.
and I scan a lot of them with my own expenses, just to make myself feel better,
and in my laptop, carefully collected, curate, and backed them up.

but later, I learnt that Henle makes some of its scores public on their website, though through a interface so the that user can only access one page every time.
isn’t edited work protected by copyright too?
if that is allowed, is it really unethical to use unauthorized ebooks?

to be honest, I collect a lot of electronic books in my laptop, which is not ideal at best,
but so do most friends I knew as undergraduate.
let me make clear that I support books whenever possible.

nevertheless, there can be some points for electronic books
apart from the law, which I cannot comment with, I try to reasons which make this sound less shady.

at least, some books in the public domain are scanned by Google and Microsoft alike,
and they are certainly legal to use.
many Loeb library, for example, are digitalized this way.

in fact, some books evidently not in public domain are scanned and released by Internet Archive too.
as an instance, some 5 years ago I found «Counterpoint» by Knud Jeppesen was scanned and released on Internet Archive,
but he died on 1974, and his copyright should at least be valid 2024.

some search reveals that there is indeed some controversy
a legal battle between copyright holders and Google on their alleged copyright violations continued for some years,
and in 2013 Google won the settlement but Google Book’ scanning project virtually stopped.

moreover, some ebooks are released for free by the author.
while they still publish a physical version.
considerably many mathematics books published by Cambridge and Springer,
when National Taiwan University bought them, I downloaded a much as I can, when previously I had a student identity.
many poems on poetry foundation are also permissioned to be reproduced online.
I wonder who will buy the corresponding printed books, though.

regarding the present situation, my personal rule goes as follows.
on one hand, works whose contributor died for more than 50 years, argurably, should be made public and ethical to use, as part of interaction of human culture.
on the other hand, for books still undercopyright, which I value or consult very much, I try within reasonable limit to pay the creator back.
I buy the Kindle edition with a reasonable price, if that is feasible.
if not, I buy a second- hand copy, if that in turn is feasible.
if not, I buy an authorized copy from China, if that in turn is feasible.
when these are done or when none is feasible, I open Google to search for a PDF copy, and pray that one day I will write a book to pass on my knowledge.


