
Bookstore Nine Chapters

In March 2020, I saw on Facebook a post saying that Nine Chapters, a mathematics bookstore, is about to close at the end of 2020, and they are having a clearance sale. The announcement came from the shop owner, Mr Wenxian Sun himself.

Few days later, I went to Nine Chapters, some six years after the last time. Recognizing the plaque written in calligraphic style, I pushed the glass door, which made the wind chime ring, and entered the once- familiar room, with shorter shelves in the center, taller shelves in the surrounding, and piles of books at the far end. Displayed on top of the shorter shelves were various puzzles, toys, and models, including the Rush Hour, the Soma cube, Chinese rings, and wooden polyhedra, many of them I owned when I was a kid, as if my childhood memories were some donated organs, taken out and being dissected on an operation table.

When I was in elementary school, I was a quiet boy. When the boys played basketball at recess, I avoided them by reading at my seat. My classmates would talk about «Naruto» or «Slam Dunk», and I did not even know where to borrow comic books. One day the instructor asked us to take a favorite book to share with classmates, and I took an album of Maurits Escher’s engravings, and sat attentively like a dutiful guide in a museum, until anyone appreciated for a second the marvel of hyperbolic tiles and stellar polyhedra.

When I was in the second grade— at which time Taiwan saw a flurry of popular science publications— Father bought me translations of «Mathematics: The Man-made Universe» by Sherman Stein, and «Trigonometric Delights» by Eli Maor, and «In Code» by Sarah Flannery, among others. I kept pestering Father to buy me more popular science books, such as «Mathematical Sorcery» by Calvin Clawson and «How to Ace Calculus» by Colin Adams and others.

Then, when I was in the eighth grade, after reading an introduction to Euclid’s «Elements», I resolved to read «Elements» itself, of which Nine Chapters had published a translation. The translation was not found at downtown bookstores, and Father accompanied me to Nine Chapters to purchase. I read the «Elements» in three months.

Mr Wenxian Sun and his wife established Bookstore Nine Chapters in 1978, named after a nine-chapter mathematical treatise in the Han dynasty, since he found educational materials on mathematics to be lacking. By then, Taiwan and Mainland China had made temporary peace, but the Cold War had not ended; Mr Sun grasped the opportunity of introducing books from the other side of the strait (including translations of books in Soviet Union), and published those in Simplified Chinese again in Traditional Chinese. They also sold Mathematical Olympiad problem sets and other educational toys, and in their prime, many dissertations of top university students in Taiwan used to be typeset by them.

Immersed in their products, I was led to think that mathematics was a bunch of puzzles. I fashioned a Soma cube with clay according to an article of Martin Gardner’s, and constructed a slide rule copied from a plan in «Scientific American». I liked to solve the Lonpos pyramid and the Rush Hour, and build molecule models from magnetic balls and sticks (once I lost a ball, Father asked Mr Sun whether he could purchase just one ball, and Mr Sun gave him for free). I was also fascinated by the software Super Sketchbook [超 級 畫 板], which made use of Gröbner basis in a polynomial ideal to decide geometrical propositions. Eventually, Mr Sun must have remembered us, who visited so often.

Mathematics is something certain for me to get along with. It is an amusement park built exclusively for me. I know when the recorded scream is going to be played in the haunted mansion. One slot machine is out of order, which lets me enjoy my pathetic victory. I ride the carousel in eerily vivid colors, and laugh hysterically as many times as I want. Every day is sunny underneath the painted sky on the ceiling.

In the ninth grade, I spent little time preparing for the Basic Competence Test, which was not difficult for me. Instead, I read expositions on Gödel incompleteness theorem and Fermat last theorem, when I was in the eighth grade. I forced myself to read several pages a day, but I doubt how much I really understood by then about recursive functions or elliptic curves.

Their book covers look so shabby, I suspected it was done in Microsoft Paint. If you inspect closely enough, you will find traces of phototypesetting. The letters are not perfectly aligned, and some ink is fainter. Equations are often riddled with typos, which I sometimes wondered for hours, and Mr Sun announced on the website that they don’t have time to fix all that.

TeX and LaTeX matured in the 1990s, and digital typesetting of mathematics has gradually become the norm. Nowadays books from China can be shipped to Taiwan with one click, and kids are getting more than accustomed to Simplified Chinese. And now, Bookstore Nine Chapters is having a clearance sale.

Today, I had a hard time finding a book worth buying. Olympiad problems, classical geometry, solitaire board games, none of them seemed important anymore. Now I know analysis, statistics, and algebra, knowing too well to take these toys seriously. Yet there are grown- ups who regard none of them to be significant, except their cars, houses, and children.
And maybe they will end up being correct. Or maybe we will all realize, in our deathbed, nothing matters whatsoever; everything is a puzzle we play to feel being here. I wonder which is crueler, finding something you once cherished to appear foolish, or realizing something you now cherish will appear foolish.

I picked «First- Order Logic» by Raymond Smullyan, «A Modern View of Geometry» by Leonard Blumenthal, and a collection of Olympiad inequalities. I wasn't sure why I needed those, but I just wanted to pay for something.

Mr Sun asked me by the cashier, “You really don't want the Chinese translation of Olympiad inequalities, which is so much cheaper?”
“Um, no, thanks.”
“Well, if you say so. But I can't remember the price. How much is the Olympiad Inequalities?” He called his wife. “Whatever. Young man, let's just call it 400 NTD.”
“Oh, really?” I paused, overwhelmed in memories.
“What's up? It's 400 NTD.” He repeated, certainly not recognizing me.
“It’s nothing. Thank you.”

I didn’t come to Nine Chapters again, and I visualized the place being remodeled to a shoe store or Boba tea stand, which might make me sentimental if I saw it in person. However, I heard recently that Nine Chapters was still open, because many loyal customers petitioned Mr Sun not to close it. I told myself that I should check it out, but somehow, I didn’t feel any more urged to go either, perhaps so that I could stick to the picture of it being torn down.

The building, I imagine, is about to be obliterated, where the shelves have collapsed, and the polyhedron models dislodged from the latch, and plastic cars littered on the ground. In the dim daylight, I have to carefully step over broken glass to enter. Curling up in the corner, a little boy is playing the Rush Hour again.

“What are you doing here?” I asked him.
“I can’t get the red car out. It’s stuck in a traffic jam. There is only one way to do it.”
“Leave them alone. We have to get out, not the car!”
“What if the car gets lonely?”
“It doesn’t; you do. You get lonely sometimes, and you play puzzles, one after another. But playing puzzles never stops you from being lonely. So stop that, and come with me.”
He screams. “But I must get it out! Help me get it out!”
I part the debris to cross my legs beside him, but sands and rocks keep falling.
“One more puzzle, and we leave, okay?”
