

the 2021 Tokyo Olympic having just finished reminded me of a scene in «From Up on Poppy Hill», where there is a poster of the 1964 Tokyo Olympic in the background.
last September when Ghibli studio release a bunch of screenshots from their beloved films, the scene mentioned above was one of them.
by then Japan had just postponed the Olympic, and still unsure whether it would succeeded the next year;
hence, the scene was used to made fun of the government, and added faux subtitles such as “I hope 2021 Olympic would break a leg!”
at least this informed me the fact that Tokyo had held Olympic once,
and urged me to watch «From Up on Poppy Hill», a lesser known Ghibli opus, on Netflix.
and the reference to 1965 Olympic was weirdly relevant, both in the film and in reality.

Umi Matsuzaki, high school student, works at her family’s boarding house by the Port of Yokohama.
her father Yuichiro has been killed in the Korean War,
but every morning she raises a signal flag in praying of a safe voyage, as a personal ritual.

the flag attracts Shun Kazama, another high school student nearby,
and writes a poem on the school newspaper.
Umi and Shun was then acquainted and have mutual affection.

nevertheless, when Umi shows Shun a photo, which Yuichiro is in, Shun recalls <he has seen another copy of the photo from his adoptive father Akio>.
Shun thought that he and Umi are siblings,
and he refrains from meeting her.
Umi confronted Shun for the matter,
and on believing that they are siblings,
she says she will still love him.

nevertheless, the situation is more convoluted;
Shun’s mother died in giving birth, and Shun’s father was killed in the World War;
Shun was therefore given to Yuichiro,
and since Yuichiro was unable to raise either, he was in turn given to Akio.
captain Yoshio, who is in the old photo too, meets Umi and Shun, and explained the history to them.

there is another subordinate plot, <that an antique building Latin Quarter, used by student clubs, is to be demolished>.
Shun and Umi, reluctant to see the building torn down, take a train to Tokyo to see a chair of school;
it is <where the screenshot is>.
after the volunteer remodelling by the students, the chair decided to not to demolish Latin Quarter.

with both plots resolved, one would think a happy ending follows;
but Umi and Shun only looked blandly towards to the setting sun, not showing any sign whether they will continue their relationship.
another day begins,
and Umi again raises the flag, waiting for her father never coming back.
with the melancholy ending song playing in the background, all there is, is emptiness.



<<<
剛結束的東京奧運令我想到《來自紅花坂》裡的一張 1964 東京奧運的海報；
去年吉卜力釋出 fair use 的電影截圖，這張剛好呼應時事，就被一些人拿來當梗圖。
那時我才知道 1964 東京也有辦過奧運，而且也沒看過《來自紅花坂》，就在 Netflix 上看了。
不知道導演是否刻意加入東京奧運這個細節，但這張海報很呼應全劇的訊息。

高中生松崎海的父親在朝鮮戰爭中陣亡，她負責照料旅社；
雖然爸爸已經不在，每天她都會升起信號旗，當成一個儀式。
風間俊和松崎海互相喜歡，但風間以為他們是兄妹，默默和松崎疏遠。因為風間知道他是養子，從一個老照片中以為生父就是松崎的爸爸。其實風間是被人送給松崎家，松崎父母又再送給風間的養父。
最後一位老船長來見風間和松崎，確認他們不是兄妹。

其中有一個支線是，學校有一棟老社辦，要被拆毀。
風間想要維修老社辦，和松崎坐車到另一個城市見一位長官，希望長官不要拆毀，就是截圖的部分，背景有東京奧運海報。
最後學生們維修之後，長官決定維持社辦。
這樣兩件事都解決以後，應該皆大歡喜，結尾的氛圍卻沒有一點喜悅的感覺。
我們不知道風間和松崎有沒有繼續他們的感情，只看見在悲傷的歌曲配樂中，松崎再度升旗，等待不會歸來的父親。

我覺得這部電影的主題是，罪人能不能擁有幸福。
現代化的思想是否能和老社辦並存；
顛沛流離的戰後年代，不能阻止年輕人追求感情。
我很難理解日本這個國家。
日本是戰敗國，卻希望從1964奧運中展現他們的改革。
經歷金融危機，希望在2021奧運證明他們的國力。
日本中年人似乎充滿父權思想，但森喜朗因失言下台，似乎又表示已經有女性主義思潮。日本人快速西化，又酷愛漢字，書法，茶道，禪。
真正的問題在於，人類有沒有可能原諒。
日本和德國以前殺人，國民黨也殺人，我相信今天的民眾幾乎沒有人認為這些是對的，他們看到別國人一再檢討上一輩做過的事，應該也很痛苦。
但怎麼樣是真的懺悔?
怎樣才能真的原諒?
如果懺悔就能求得原諒，為何不先犯罪再說?
如果懺悔也不能買得原諒，罪人的一生就毀了嗎?

我們知道自己有原罪，卻一再犯罪；
我們期望寬恕，卻無法寬恕。
人類渺小，狹隘，自私，衝動，唯一擁有的是希望。
希望就像山丘上的一面旗子，我們每天期待海的另一端有人看見它，卻一再失望。
我們一天一天等待，夕陽從海面落下了，隔天再升起旗子，這樣用盡一生的力氣等待，等著被愛，等著被理解，等待和平，等病毒消失，等到頭髮白了，牙齒都沒了，剩下一口氣了，卻還不明白，原來希望根本就不會降臨。
>>>

<<August 12>>